# Lets learn some Azure! Az204 Pt.4 - Develop solutions that use Blob storage

One more of those chapters I feel comfortable with.

Is probably what I should say if it wasn't for the fact that yesterday I renewed two of my certificates, Azure Administrator Associate and DevOps Engineer Expert. I did get them both renewed, but I actually failed the Blob storage lifecycle chapter! (I don't remember which one of those two it was that had this chapter..)

I should probably make sure to learn this chapter anyway, so of we go!

## Explore Azure Blob storage

Just like every chapter we start with a basics module. When it comes to storage this means we get to know the structure of a storage (Storage account -> Storage container -> storage blob), which types of blobs we can use (Block blobs, append blobs, and Page blobs), and storage account types (General purpose V2, and premium).

Naturally we also go through relationships between those.

Premium accounts are mostly used for block and append blobs needing high throughput, for example database storage, and VM disks, otherwise you should always aim for a GPv2 account.

Blobs come in different tiers, Hot (often accessed), cold (rarely accessed), and archive (never accessed). Prices are dependent on access regularity, so hot is cheap to access but cheap to store, and cold and archive are the other way around, with Archive costs almost nothing it can take days to get a file.

Apart from this it goes through security (everything is encrypted, access can be set on all levels, and you can use ~~AzureAD~~ Entra ID or shared access tokens to access them), and static web pages (store a blob in a container named `$web`)

> Pop quiz: You have a blob named `MyBlob` in a container named `MyContainer` on a storage account named, you guessed it, `MyStorageAccount`. What is the URL to your blob?
>
> 1. https://MyStorageAccount.blob.core.windows.net/MyBlob@MyContainer
> 2. https://azure.com/MyStorageAccount/MyContainer/MyBlob
> 3. https://MyStorageAccount.blob.azure.com/MyContainer/MyBlob
> 4. https://MyStorageAccount.blob.core.windows.net/MyContainer/MyBlob
> 5. https://MyStorageAccount.blob.windows.net/MyContainer/MyBlob
>
> Answer: 4

## Manage the Azure Blob storage lifecycle

"Lifecycle management is cool" - Nobody.

Like mentioned you have three different tiers of a storage, Hot, Cold, and Archive. You can set up automation between these tiers to automagically save a couple of dollars.

> NOTE: This _only_ works on GPv2 accounts! If you, like me, have old GPv1 storage accounts set up they will not have this feature.

Setting this up is done using rules written in json or created in a GUI which writes the json for you.

A rule needs a filter, for example "blobs not accessed for 20 days, and starting with the name MyBlob", and an action, for example "move this file to archive". There is an example included [in the module](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/manage-azure-blob-storage-lifecycle/4-add-policy-blob-storage) well worth looking at.

You can set up rules to move between any and all tiers _apart from one_: you can not automatically move from Archive to any other. Archived files are considered offline. In order to get it back ("rehydrate" is the word) you have to either copy the file to an online container, or change the tier of the blob manually. 

This is pretty much it. The entire module.

There is a big red note you probably should remember as this is the kind of knowledge that may trip you up on a test question:

> NOTE: Changing a tier from archive to online does not change the LastWrite and LastRead time. This means that if you have a rule to automatically move to Archive after 20 days, and you change the tier to hot, you may actually end up looping it back to archive right away.

## Work with Azure Blob storage

Last and the only one containing a lab, this module is about developing storage stuff using the .Net Azure Storage client libraries. I wonder what those are..

### What is Azure Storage client libraries

An SDK. Or an API. Or a DLL. Whatever you call it, it is a collection of classes, methods, and properties that lets you programmatically work with blob storage.

It consists of five basic classes:

- BlobServiceClient
    - Manage data and settings of a storage account
- BlobContainerClient
    - Manage data and settings of a storage container
- BlobClient
    - Manage a storage blob, including read, write, upload, download, and so on
- AppendBlobClient
    - Manage Append blob specifics such as, well... appending data to a blob.
- BlockBlobClient
    - Manage Block blob specifics such as staging and committing data.

The rest of this entire module goes through how to use this SDK to create, add, remove, and change metadata of all different objects. If you know some basic C# this is nothing weird, you can mostly figure stuff out, and instead of repeating this module I will simply say: Read it through. I doubt this will be on a test as this is a bit to program specific, but knowing there is an SDK, and that you can get/set metadata using REST should be enough to pass. I hope.

## With that said

we're done with blobs, and we're approaching the chapters I believe I will have to study the most. Stuff I rarely, or never, worked with. Tomorrow I'm kicking it up a notch with `Develop solutions that use Azure Cosmos DB`.

Until then!
