# Lets learn some Azure! Az204 Pt.3 - Implement Azure Functions

This is the third post in a series called `Let's learn some Azure! Az204`.
To read them all, and in the right order, start here:

- [pt. 1 - Space....](posts/az204.pt1.md)
- [pt. 2 - App services](posts/az204.pt2.md)
- [pt. 3 - Implement Azure Functions](posts/az204.pt3.md)
- [pt. 4 - Develop solutions that use Blob storage](posts/az204.pt4.md)
- [pt. 5 - Develop solutions that use Azure Cosmos DB](posts/az204.pt5.md)
- [pt. 6 - Onwards and upwards. ACR, ACI, and ACA.](posts/az204.pt6.md)
- [pt. 7 - The final frontier!](posts/az204.pt7.md)

----

Back on the horse, this time for a shorter post. The Azure Functions chapter is but two modules.
Given that I have done quite a lot of work on Azure Functions before I wont spend all to much time here. If you haven't, I suggest at least do more than brush through it like I did.

## Explore Azure Functions

We're starting with the "learn the basics" module. There are basically two parts here so let's look at them one by one

### What is Azure functions?

A serverless hosted solution for running workflows, based on pretty much the same setup as [an App Service](posts/az204.pt2.md). You have an App Service Plan that hosts an app, but in this case the app is a function app, and this function app runs code inside a container of some kind. Functions has triggers (when to start) and bindings (input and output).

Scaling is based on a "per Function app" basis, which means all your functions running in the same function app share their resources.

Just like with web apps, Functions supports scaling in and out, network integrations, custom domains, and a lot of other nifty things.

There is also a feature for Azure functions that I think is really cool called [Durable functions](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/azure-functions/durable/durable-functions-overview?tabs=csharp-inproc&wt.mc_id=DT-MVP-5005317), but since those are just mentioned briefly here I am guessing there will be no reason to spend time on them right now.

### Hosting options and scaling

Hosting your app is also similar to web apps, albeit with some different names:

- Consumption plan
    - The default one. Automatic scaling, Pay as you go, will scale down to 0 (first job in the morning takes some additional time due to cold starts)
    - Automatic scaling
- Premium plan
    - Same basics as Consumption, but more powerful host machines, can use network integration, and I believe there are no cold starts here (documentation says `Automatically scales based on demand using pre-warmed workers, which run applications with no delay after being idle`)
    - Automatic scaling
- Dedicated plan
    - Runs on a standard AppService plan, which means it supports manual scaling and dedicated resources.
    - Manual or autoscale
- App Service Environment and Kubernetes
    - Custom hosting options for extra high isolation scenarios
    - ASE: Autoscale
    - Kubernetes: KEDA based

One thing that the learn module doesn't really make clear for me is the scaling in consumption and premium. For consumption it says "`based on the number of incoming trigger events.`" and for premium "`based on the number of events that its functions are triggered on.`". I do not understand the differences here so if you can explain it better, please [do so...](https://mastodon.nu/@bjompen)

To a certain extent you can change scaling behaviour in config files, if you for example need to limit the maximum amount of instances.

And like I already said, remember that all your apps in your function app share resources, so if your function app runs in consumption (limited to 1.5 GB ram) it might not be a good idea to run 100 functions at the same time.

## Develop Azure Functions

The second module goes in to a bit more details on the required files and bindings, and also includes a lab on how to create and deploy functions using VSCode. Like mentioned, I have done this quite a lot and won't bother with this lab for now.

For triggers the need to know is pretty easy: A function app can and must have only one trigger, and triggers can be for example time, queueStorage, or HTTP request.

Bindings have some more need to knows. A binding go either in or out (or both), and contains the data sent to and from your functions. For example, an output binding can point to a table storage, and will then write data to said storage.

Both of these requirements are set using a _functions.json_ file if you are using a script language, and in parameter decorators if you are using a compiled language.

Other than that your structure kind of depends on what language you are creating your code in.

One important detail is that you _do not hard code data such as connection strings_ in your config files. This is because you can have a [local settings file](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/azure-functions/functions-develop-local?wt.mc_id=DT-MVP-5005317#local-settings-file) on your machine that lets you use development data, while app settings on your function are used in production.

Since I haven't had one of them here yet, I'm going to end this post with not one, but two...

> Pop quiz: Which of these tools/addons should you have on your dev machine
>
> 1. Azure Functions extension
> 2. Docker
> 3. Azure Resources
> 4. Azure Functions Core Tools
> 5. Visual Studio Code
>
> Answer: 1, 4, 5
>
> Note: You will also need plugins for your development language and runtimes, but since those varies.. 

> Pop quiz: Which languages are supported in Azure Functions (as of today..)
>
> Answer: C#, C# script, JavaScript, Python2, Java, PowerShell, TypeScript, Go/Rust/other
>
> Note: Go/rust/other is supported using custom handlers. I have no idea what the scope of "other" actually includes.

## And that's it

That's chapter 2 done. Next up, Develop solutions that use Blob storage. Until then!
